OSDOCS-19749: adds audit trail docs MCP gateway (#112003)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/ref-mcp-gateway-install-gateway-ext-api.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// *mcp_gateway_install/mcp-gateway-install.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: REFERENCE
[id="ref-mcp-gateway-install-ext-api_{context}"]
= The MCPGatewayExtension custom resource API reference

[role="_abstract"]
You can use the following API reference information for each MCP gateway `MCPGatewayExtension` custom resource (CR).

.MCPGatewayExtension
[cols="1,1,1,2", options="header"]
|===

|*Field*
|*Type*
|*Required*
|*Description*

|`spec`

> |[MCPGatewayExtensionSpec](#mcpgatewayextensionspec)

Reviewer: Links in this style aren't rendering in preview correctly. Verify all.

|Yes
|The specification for MCPGatewayExtension custom resource

|`status`
|[MCPGatewayExtensionStatus](#mcpgatewayextensionstatus)
|No
|The status for the custom resource
|===

.MCPGatewayExtensionSpec
[cols="1,1,1,2", options="header"]
|===

|*Field*
|*Type*
|*Required*
|*Description*

|`targetRef`
|[MCPGatewayExtensionTargetReference](#mcpgatewayextensiontargetreference)
|Yes
|The Gateway listener to extend with MCP protocol support

|`publicHost`
|String
|No
|Overrides the public host derived from the listener hostname. Use when the listener has a wildcard and you need a specific host

|`privateHost`
|String
|No

> |Overrides the internal host used for hair-pinning requests back through the gateway. Defaults to `<gateway>-istio.<ns>.svc.cluster.local:<port>`, with an `https://` scheme prefix when the targeted Gateway listener uses the HTTPS protocol. The supplied value is honoured verbatim, so an operator can include a scheme (e.g. `https://my-gw:443`) or pin to a different port.

Reviewer: I believe that ISG still asks us to avoid Latin abbreviations, so this might be:

```suggestion
|Overrides the internal host used for hair-pinning requests back through the gateway. Defaults to `<gateway>-istio.<ns>.svc.cluster.local:<port>`, with an `https://` scheme prefix when the targeted Gateway listener uses the HTTPS protocol. The supplied value is honoured verbatim, so an operator can include a scheme (for example, `https://my-gw:443`) or pin to a different port.
```

|*Type*
|*Required*
|*Description*

|`secretName`
|String
|Yes
|Name of the secret containing the PEM-encoded public key used by the broker to verify trusted-header JWTs. The secret must have a data entry with key `key`. When `generate` is `Enabled`, the operator creates this secret |

|`generate`
|String
|No
|Controls whether the operator generates an ECDSA P-256 key pair. `Enabled`: creates `<secretName>` (public key) and `<secretName>-private` (private key) with owner references. `Disabled` (default): the secret must already exist. Changing this field requires deleting the existing secrets first to ensure the keys are a matching pair |
|===

.SessionStore
[cols="1,1,1,2", options="header"]
|===

|*Field*
|*Type*
|*Required*
|*Description*

|`secretName`
|String
|Yes
|Name of the secret containing a `CACHE_CONNECTION_STRING` data entry. The value should be a Redis connection string  such as `redis://<user>:<pass>@<host>:<port>/<db>`. The secret must exist in the same namespace as the `MCPGatewayExtension` CR and must have the label `mcp.kuadrant.io/secret: "true"`. Injected as `CACHE_CONNECTION_STRING` environment variable into the MCP broker-router component deployment.
|===

> //TBD

Reviewer: More to come? :)

.AuditConfig
[cols="1,1,1,2", options="header"]
|===

|*Field*
|*Type*
|*Required*
|*Description*

|`parameterLogging`
|String
|No
|Controls whether tool call parameters are included in the audit trail. `Enabled`: `params.arguments` from `tools/call` requests are logged, truncated to 1KB. The default value is `Disabled`: parameters are not logged.

|`identityHeaders`
|String
|No
|Header names to check, in order, for caller identity when W3C Baggage `user.id` is absent. No defaults: Operators must explicitly list the headers their Auth layer sets. When empty, only baggage `user.id` is used.
|===

.MCPGatewayExtensionStatus
[cols="1,1,1,2", options="header"]
|===

|*Field*
|*Type*
|*Required*
|*Description*

|`conditions`
|link:https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/apis/meta/v1#Condition[Kubernetes meta/v1.Condition]
|List of conditions that define the status of the resource

> |===

Reviewer: Needs another entry to meet the table spec.

|`backendPingIntervalSeconds`
|Integer
|No
|How often (in seconds) the broker pings upstream MCP servers. Min: 10, Max: 7200, Default: 60

|`trustedHeadersKey`
|[TrustedHeadersKey](#trustedheaderskey)
|No
|Configures trusted-header key pair for JWT-based tool filtering. When set, the public key secret is injected into the broker deployment with the `TRUSTED_HEADER_PUBLIC_KEY` environment variable.

|`httpRouteManagement`
|String
|No
|Controls whether the operator manages the gateway `HTTPRoute` CR. The default value is `Enabled`: creates and manages the `HTTPRoute` CR. `Disabled`: does not create an `HTTPRoute` CR. Disabling does not delete a previously created route.

|`sessionStore`
|[SessionStore](#sessionstore)
|No
|References a secret for redis-based session storage. When not set, in-memory session storage is used.

|`urlElicitation`
|String
|No
|Controls URL-based token elicitation. `Enabled`: creates a separate `/tokens` HTTPRoute and passes `--enable-url-elicitation` to the broker. `Disabled` (default): no `/tokens` route is created.

//TBD

> |`audit`

Reviewer 2: Where this `audit` came from? I can't see `audit` field in upstream 0.7.0-rc3:
https://github.com/Kuadrant/mcp-gateway/blob/v0.7.0-rc3/api/v1alpha1/mcpgatewayextension_types.go

Reviewer 3: +1 on this. Was this adoc generated based on old/closed PRs or issues rather than what landed in the upstream?

Author: I did not generate the doc; but yes, this was created before the scope change. I left the TBD comment in to be sure we saw it, that way I knew whether this was in or out. Removed.
